{:date "2011/12/11" :author "Craig Brozefsky" :title "Voice"}

I sat down to take my next step, to write the next post, and soon had
100 lines of text in [someone else's
voice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Istv%C3%A1n_M%C3%A9sz%C3%A1ros_%28professor%29).

It was [someone I admire](http://leobabauta.com/bio.html) and whose
[writings](http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/) have been a
part of my thoughts for over a decade.  I was soon filled with a sense
of dread.  How would I live up to such a voice?  Was that really the
voice I needed now?

The dread turned into frustration, then a sense of being overwhelmed
by the scope of what I wanted to write about.  In my mind, the phrase:

> I want to create a historically maintainable, hegemonic alternative
> to the social-metabolic order of capitalism.

is sensible, precise, and inspiring.  I doubt it rings like that in
other ears though.  I thought I would explain all the terms, unpack
it.  Soon I was planning out a grand essay, or a book.  I would have
to be rigorous and extensive in my presentation of my thought.  I
would have to defend it against critics who had no interest in
improving it, only destroying or discrediting it.

So I took a break and had a beer.

# The Conversational Voice

I get into conversations at bars frequently.  I am careful, I start
slowly, let questions indicate further interest, and I limit my scope
and detail to appropriate levels.

This could be a useful voice, but I have some issues with it, and as a
voice for writing it suffers from lag in feedback.  Its vocabulary
adjusted, its pace tuned, as I learn more about the audience.  That
voice is not a very precise guide here, where an audience is only an
abstraction for now.

There is another problem, though.

I am practicing my writing in order to develop the ideas I have, and
to share them with others so they can grow.  A conversational voice
that is torn between where the audience is at, and where my head and
hopes of the future are at.

# The Academic Voice

I enjoy reading critical theory and philosophy, but it has taken me
years to absorb the jargon and context.  In a few cases, it could be
avoided, but it serves a purpose -- letting a community talk about a
very large and complex topic for several generations.  Mix in all of
the nuances of human expression, desires to perform a given aesthetic,
or differentiate oneself from subgroups in the topic, and you have a
rich, florid, extravagant field of language that makes a rococo
cathedral look like your high school's trophy case.

Since these are conversations spanning lifetimes, we find ourselves
going back to the words of the dead.  Many times you only read a
summary of the ideas, or one take on what was said.  Eventually you
will find that the retellings lose alot of the original story, intent,
and depth.  

The obvious downside here is that you are asking your reader to be
responsible for alot of work.  The not so obvious penalty is that you
are tying your ideas to a big network of thought.  You will find
yourself spending lots of energy differentiating your use of the word
from other peoples use, and fighting ancient wars whose generals are
long dead.

# The Obligatory Synthesis

So what components of these two voices can we use within the framework
of a blog?

* Serial Presentation -- blog pieces are distinct installments, with a
  presentation in series when archived.  This can record some aspects
  of the development of the conversation, and the mutations of the
  thoughts over time.  Bit by bit a corpus can be built, with later
  pieces developing previous topics further -- as the reader feels fit
  to progress.  Lastly, the pace and order of presentation can be
  tuned as feedback trickles in.

* Short Pieces -- with the largest piece being perhaps a short essay,
  specific topics must be chosen, or light sketches must be drawn.
  This can help preserve simplicity, and supports a conversational
  tone.

* Hypertextuality -- referring to previous posts, and linking to
  external references helps build a network of thoughts.  It also
  eases the burden on the reader to learn jargon if links are provided
  for new terms, or terms with less orthodox definitions.  Links to
  original sources make it easier for the reader to check the words of
  the dead against the stories we tell about them.

* Aggregations -- After a corpus has accumulated, new pieces can be
  built by following threads across topics, or by providing an
  overview of a multi-faceted topic.

* Feedback -- Having survived Usenet, I am skeptical of the value of
  comments.  As a curmudgeon, I am loathe to type into web forms.  I
  think email is still the preferred way to get feedback, and it lets
  me read and respond in my native environment, Emacs.

# Where that leaves me

Sitting in the bar, trying to build a path to the future, one
conversation at a time.